## 参考书目

由于1939-1940年间，对外国学者而言，查阅法国本土的档案纪录极为困难，本书完全依靠已出版的作品写作。幸运的是，关于法国大革命，已经出版的作品足够丰富，可以在法国以外的大型研究图书馆里借阅到。我把这些作品分为三类：
1. 革命时期的出版物，如期刊、书籍、小册子、国民公会中讲话的复印
1. 革命后在国家档案馆和其他档案馆里的档案汇编
1. 19和20世纪学者的传记、论著、专题论文，经常也包括1790年代的材料。

此外，还有对共和二年（大约可等同于1793年7月到1794年7月）中救国委员会举措的评论，这其中包括很多在写作本书时还没有发表的评论。对1940年以前参考书目的详细内容，可以参考我的"Bibliographical Article: Fifty Years of the Committee of Public Safety", _Journal of Modern History_ 13 (1941), pp. 375-397.

如果读者想要阅读更晚近的，概述法国大革命的英文著作，可以参考D. M. G. Sutherland, Oxford 1986; John M. Roberts, Oxford 1978; N. Hampson, London 1975; 还有由Albert Soboul的法文著作译为英文的London 1974，由Frangois Furet和Daniel Richet著作译为英文的, London and New York 1970。直接讨论救国委员会的著作较少，只有一些法文口袋书，"Que sais-je?", by Marc Bouloiseau, _Le comite de salut public_, 1793-1795, Paris 1968. 也可参考Bouloiseau在1972年的著作，译名为_The Jacobin Republic_, 1792-1794, Cambridge and New York 1983。还有M. J. Sydenham的_The First French Republic_, London 1974.

此前提到的第一类内容，卷帙浩繁，浩如烟海，无法一一列举。大革命本身就是政治讨论的一次大爆发。无数出版物，如Hebert的_Pere Duchesne_，还有同时期的书报小册子，在前文中已经提到。报道国民公会和巴黎雅各宾俱乐部中辩论的_Moniteur universels_是最常用的参考报刊。原报纸是大对开发行，但后来有较便捷的复制版，_Reimpression de I'ancien Moniteur_, 31 vols., Paris 1847-1850，在第31卷包含有很好的人名、地名和讨论内容索引。本书还大量参考了E. B. Courtois的report to the Convention in 1795，_Papiers trouves chez Robespierre et ses complices_, Paris an III，重印加大三卷版，Paris 1828.

本书中出现的木质版画插图，由一位19世纪的佚名作者，使用18世纪的人像画绘制，出版于A. Challamel and D. Lacroix, _La Revolution francaise: Album du centenaire_, Paris 1889。选择它的目的是给救国委员会成员提供较为均一的插图。The verse translations on page 317 were made by A. J. Bingham and are reprinted here with his permission. Those on page 325 are by the present author. The second category consists of multi-volumed compilations, some of which were initiated a century ago, were then suspended in the 1930s and 1940s, and have recently been completed or nearly completed. Chief among these is the Archives parlementaires, which reprints the proceedings of the Convention along with other materials such as petitions and reports received by it. See Archives parlementaires, 1st series, 95 vols., Paris 1862 to date. Volume 95, the most recent (1987), reaches only to August 1794. Each volume has its own index, and there are cumulative indexes in Volumes 71 and 82

The most indispensable work for the present book, edited by Alphonse Aulard and his successors, is Recueil des actes du Comite de salut public avec la correspondance des representants en mission, 28 vols., Paris 1889-1951. There are also three index volumes. For the controversy concerning Aulard's methods in editing this work see my article in the Journal of Modern History, cited above. Aulard also edited the speeches and proceedings of the Paris Jacobin Club, La Societe des Jacobins: Recueil de documents, 6 vols., Paris 1889¬ 1897, a n index in Volume 6. These six volumes have been reprinted by A M S Press, New York 1973. Two of the many publications by Pierre Caron are of great importance: Paris pendant la Terreur: rapports des agents secrets du ministre de Vinterieur^ 6 vols., plus a seventh volume of index, Paris 1910-1978; and La Commission des Subsistances de I'an I I : proces-verbaux et actes, 2 vols., Paris 1924-1925. On matters of education and the arts much can be learned from James Guillaume, Proces-verbaux du Comite de 1*Instruction publique de la Convention Nationale, 6 vols., plus 2 volumes of index, Paris 1891-1957. On the mobilization and the war, see E. Charavay, Correspondence generale de Carnot, avec des notes historiques et biographiques, Paris 1892-1907.

In the third category we turn first to biographical studies of the twelve members of the Committee of Public Safety in the Year II. On Robespierre there has been much writing in French, and hardly less so in English. To the older standard work of J. M. Thompson, Robespierre, 2 vols., London 1935 (reprinted 1968) may be added Norman Hampson, Life and Opinions of Maximilien Robespierre, London 1974; George Rude, Portrait of Robespierre, Revolutionary Democrat, London 1975; and David P. Jordan, The Revolutionary Career of Maximilien Robespierre, New York 1985. Robespierre's own "works," mainly his journalism and speeches, have been many times reprinted; the most complete and critical edition, under the auspices of the Societe des etudes robespierristes, is the Oeuvres completes, 10 vols., Paris 1938 to date. Saint-Just has also attracted much attention in France, as in J. P. Gross, Saint-Just, sa politique et ses missions, Paris 1976; but there is less recent work in English, for which E. N. Curtis, Saint-Just, Colleague of Robespierre, New York 1935, can still be cited. There is a new one-volume edition of his letters, speeches, poems and political writings: Saint-Just Oeuvres completes, Paris 1984.

For Carnot there is a great biography by Marcel Reinhard, Lazare Carnot, 2 vols., Paris 1952. See also Leo Gershoy, Bertrand Barere, Reluctant Terrorist, Princeton 1962, and G. Bouchard, Un organisateur de la victoire, Prieur de la Cote-cFOr, membre du Comite de salut public, Paris 1946. For all the others we must depend on work done before the First World War: F. Mege, ed., Correspondance de Georges Couthon, Paris 1872, and Le Puy-de-Dome en 1793 et le proconsulat de Cuthon, Paris 1877; A. Begis, ed., Memoires de Billaud-Varenne, Paris 1893, which contains information on Collot d'Herbois; A. Montier, Robert Lindet, Paris 1899; L. Levy- Schneider, Le conventionnel Jeanbon Saint-Andre, Paris 1901 (a remarkable work); P. Bliard, Le conventionnel Prieur de la Marne en mission dans I'Ouest, Paris 1906; and E. Dard, Herault de Sechelles, Paris 1907.

Regionally, in addition to Paris, the present book gives attention to Couthon's mission to the Puy-de-Dome and Lyon, Saint-Andre's to Brittany and the Vendee, and Saint-Just's to Alsace. Relevant, therefore, are Colin Lucas, The Structure of the Terror: The Example of Javogues and the Loire, Paris 1973, for an area adjoining the Puyde- Dome and Lyon; E. Herriot, Lyon riest plus, 4 vols., Paris 1937-1940, detailing the Terror at Lyon in Volume 4; N. Hampson, La marine de Fan I I : mobilisation de la flotte de l'Ocean, Paris 1959, which in dealing with the navy reinforces the biography of Saint-Andre cited above; and R. Reuss, La grande fuite de decembre 1793 et la situation politique et religieuse de Bas-Rhin, Strasbourg 1924. For the impact in many parts of France of visitations by the Paris militants there is a vast work of Richard Cobb, The People's Armies: The Armees Revolutionnaires, Instrument of the Terror in the Departments, April 1793 to Floreal of the Year I I , New Haven 1987, a monumental thesis by a British historian originally written in French for the doctorat es lettres. For the insurrections in western France see D. M. G. Sutherland, The Chouans: The Social Origins of Popular Counter-Revolution in Upper Brittany, 1770-1796, Oxford 1982. Mention should also be made of the recent book by R. Secher, Le genocide franco-franqais: la Vendee-Vengee, Paris 1986, which takes a maximalist view of the deaths and devastation caused by the Revolution, and is critically reviewed in the Annales historiques de la Revolution franqaise, No. 268 (1987). pp. 224-226.

For Paris attention has fallen mainly on the sans-culottes, the organized activists from both the popular and middle classes. Here the great work is Albert Soboul, Les sans-culottes parisiens en Fan I I : mouvement populaire et gouvernement revolutionnaire, 2 juin 1793-9 thermidor an I I , Paris 1958, of which there have been two abridged English translations. For even more local and realistic detail see Morris Slavin, The French Revolution in Miniature; section Droitsde- rhomme, 1789-1795, Princeton 1984; and H a im Burstin, Le faubourg Saint-Marcel a I'epoque revolutionnaire, Paris 1983. The work of Richard Cobb on the armees revolutionnaires, cited above, is also relevant here. Note, too, R. B. Rose, The Enrages, Socialists of the French Revolution?, New York 1965.

On the armies, including their training, tactics, mobilization and supply, see above all Jean-Paul Bertaud, whose book of 1979 appeared in a translation by the present writer under the title of The Army of the French Revolution: From Citizen Soldiers to Instrument of Power, Princeton 1989. Two of the field armies have been intensively studied: the Army of the North by John A. Lynn, The Bayonets of the Republic: Motivation and Tactics in the Army of Revolutionary France, 1791-1794, Urbana and Chicago, 1984; and Peter Wetzlar, War and Subsistence: The Sambre and Meuse Army in 1794, New York 1985. Samuel F. Scott, The Response of the Royal Army to the French Revolution: The Role and Development of the Line Army, Oxford 1978, unfortunately for the present purpose runs only to the spring of 1793. On the navy see Hampson, La marine de Fan I I , cited above. On production of munitions the old work of Camille Richard, Le comite de salut public et les fabrications de guerre, Paris 1922, is still important. On general strategy see Steven Ross, Quest for Victory: French Military Strategy, South Brunswick, N. J. , 1973.

Many other special studies relate to themes in the present book, for example, Mona OzouPs work on the civic celebrations, translated as Festivals and the French Revolution, Cambridge, Mass., 1988; Serge Bianchi, La revolution culturelle de Fan I I : elites et peuple y 1789-1799, Paris 1982; and Michel Vovelle, Religion et revolution: la dechristianisation de Fan I I , Paris 1976. In America there are Emmet Kennedy, A Cultural History of the French Revolution, New Haven 1989, and Michael Kennedy, who has published two volumes on the Jacobin clubs in the French Revolution, Princeton 1982 and 1988, dealing with hundreds of clubs throughout France, is at work on a third volume to include the period treated in the present book. See also Crane Brinton, The Jacobins: An Essay in the New History, New York 1930, stressing the middle-class character of that famous society; and Donald Greer, The Incidence of the Terror, Cambridge, Mass., 1935, a statistical study of executions by revolutionary courts, showing the class status of the victims, the grounds of accusation, and the variations in severity in time and place.

It may be useful also to call attention to Samuel F. Scott, ed., Historical Dictionary of the French Revolution, 2 vols., Westport, Conn., 1984-1985; and R. J. Caldwell, The Era of the French Revolution: A Bibliography of the History of Western Civilization, 1789¬ 1799, 2 vols., New York 1985, which lists about 42,000 items by subject categories plus an alphabetical index.

At the higher level of general interpretation the old controversies between Aulard and Taine, or Aulard and Mathiez, or more recently between Marxists and anti-Marxists, have somewhat abated. The present author continues to believe that George Lefebvre, who died in 1959, and was mildly Marxist, is unsurpassed for wide and sympathetic insight into all aspects of the French Revolution. See his Revolution frangaise, Paris 1951, translated into two volumes, New York 1962 and 1964. Indeed, it was an earlier version of this book (Paris 1930) that suggested to me the idea of writing on the twelve men who made up the "great" Committee of Public Safety. For a more recent dispute see Francois Furet, Penser la Revolution frangaise, Paris 1978, translated as Interpreting the French Revolution, Cambridge, England, 1981, and Albert Soboul, Comprendre la Revolution: Problemes politiques de la Revolution frangaise, 1789¬ 1797, Paris 1981, translated as Understanding the French Revolution, New York 1988. While I have often agreed with both Furet and Soboul, I have my doubts on the kind of historical necessity that they see in the Revolution, which for Soboul is a Marxist type of dialectic or class conflict involving a transition from feudalism to capitalism, and for Furet is the persistence of a frame of mind or psychology first expressed by Rousseau, involving concepts of virtue, the general will , the people, and the nation. Furet prefers to understand the Revolution in terms of consequences or of long trends both preceding and following the event, and so to subordinate the conscious intentions and language of the Revolutionaries to underlying or structural considerations. I would think that man is a goal-seeking animal, whose stated purposes and intentions are worthy of a humanistic attention, and also of a searching judgment. Hence comes the abundance of direct quotations in this book, showing what the Revolutionaries actually said (or are said to have said), all of which, for whatever it may be worth, are taken verbatim from sources such as are listed above.
